[Music]
Louise Jones as a pathologist who's
helping to pioneer a brand-new breast
cancer tissue bank she works with tissue
that's been taken from cancer patients
[Applause]
before taking any samples for the bank
she carries out a routine diagnosis so
this is a fresh tissue sample from
someone who's still in theater exactly
so what's the process now so the first
thing that we're going to do is actually
paint the surface of it and the reason
that we do that is that it marks the
margins so if any abnormality goes to
paint then we know that that is too
close to the patient so it's a marker
it's a mark up exactly so now what we
have to do is actually cut it away what
we're trying to ensure is that there's
no tumor in here that we would have to
alert the surgeon to straight away so
how's it looking and it looks completely
normal
there's no evidence the tumor in it in
terms of the tissue bank now what's the
what's the next step so we're still
interested in keeping normal tissue in
the tissue bank as a good control so
what we're going to do now is select an
area that we can then freeze down okay
so we just dissect out an area and the
idea is to freeze down very small pieces
because they will freeze then very
rapidly and then in fact we actually put
it on to foil just ordinary foil because
this allows us to freeze multiple pieces
simultaneously so now I'm going to just
put this immerse it into the liquid
nitrogen which we've got in here it's
just a super cold so that's instantly
freezing it absolutely yep and then
Sally will transfer those pieces of
tissue into small tubes which will allow
us then to Bank each pieces of tissue
separately for a long-term storage
thankfully this patient didn't have a
tumor but more often than not
Louise received samples which do contain
cancerous tissue
yesterday we had a case a specimen from
a lady who has got breast cancer that
yellow is the background fatty tissue
and this is the tumor which you can see
quite clearly a very pale round tumor
we're just looking at that I mean it's
not considered to be a large tumor this
is a fairly large tumor which obviously
means that it's possible for us to take
additional tissue for research at this
point I was starting to feel uneasy
thinking about this patient and indeed
my own sister's condition and then we
need to take off specimens okay the
tissue bank is on another site and
Louise routinely walks samples through
the streets of London it's housed in a
very unassuming building simply known as
the cryo shed when you said cryo they
didn't really believe the shed bit but
it's it's a shed in this one small
building tens of thousands of samples
can be stored low-tech they're kept at a
nippy - 184 degrees and will only be
defrosted when they're needed for vital
research how important is the tissue
bank this facility it's going to make a
difference because ultimately anything
that makes a difference has to be proven
in tissue samples first
you